src/content/blog/2020/digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic/digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic.mdx, before:

---
slug: digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic
date: 2020-08-24
title: "Digital Gardening with MDX Magic"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
description: "Behold! The Magic of MDX in a Digital Garden."
tags:
  - accessibility
  - css
  - inclusive design
  - digital garden
  - mdx
featuredImage:
  url: "./daylilies-in-july.jpg"
  alt: ""
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: true
---

import {
  Button,
  Card,
  CTALink,
  DisplayBox,
  Icon,
  Link,
} from "../../../../components";

import * as GrommetSystem from "grommet";
import { Favorite, ShareOption } from "grommet-icons";

import { Prism } from "@astrojs/prism";

import { CodePen } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/codepen";
import { Flickr } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/flickr";
import { Instagram } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/instagram";
import { YouTube } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/youtube";

---

I’m not sure about any of y’all, but I have more that one personal site that I’ve created over the years, using the technology of the time. Every once in a while, I’d look back at that site and think “wow, you should really update that code, Kathleen.”

---

## Why Digital Gardening

When I first heard the term digital gardening, it really struck a chord with me because it was the perfect blend of what works for me. I could create a site that’s more of a catch-all for my interests, publish what I want, without thinking of the “state of done”, and keep moving. If I want to make a code reference for future me to remember something I learned at the time? If I want to go back and edit? Cool. If not, no big deal.

## React component support

<DisplayBox>
  <Button>Click me</Button> <Button size="small">Click me</Button>
</DisplayBox>

```jsx react-live
<div>
  <Button>Click me</Button>
  {/*<GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />*/}
</div>
```

<Prism lang="jsx" code={`const foo = 'bar';`} />

## gatsby-plugin-embed is SWEET!

### CodePen embeds!

<CodePen codePenId="eYOQQxY" />

### Flickr embeds!

<Flickr flickrLink="5305/5641024002_61bbfb08f2_3k.jpg" />

### YouTube embeds!

<YouTube youTubeId="yGd8j0sXhQ4" />

### Instagram embeds!

<Instagram instagramId="B3z1w2hg4WY" />

## Hello... custom codeblocks!

Fancy custom codeblocks are so fancy, yo.

### Editable fancy code

```jsx react-live
<div>
  <Button size="large">Click me</Button>
  {/* <GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />
  <GrommetSystem.Box
    direction="row"
    border={{ color: "brand", size: "large" }}
    pad="medium"
  >
    <GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />
    <GrommetSystem.CheckBoxGroup options={["Maui", "Kauai", "Oahu"]} />
  </GrommetSystem.Box>
  <GrommetSystem.Card height="small" width="small" background="light-1">
    <GrommetSystem.CardHeader pad="medium">Header</GrommetSystem.CardHeader>
    <GrommetSystem.CardBody pad="medium">Body</GrommetSystem.CardBody>
    <GrommetSystem.CardFooter
      pad={{ horizontal: "small" }}
      background="light-2"
    >
      <GrommetSystem.Button icon={<Favorite color="red" />} hoverIndicator />
      <GrommetSystem.Button
        icon={<ShareOption color="plain" />}
        hoverIndicator
      />
    </GrommetSystem.CardFooter>
  </GrommetSystem.Card> */}
</div>
```

---

If you haven't yet, head on over and check out [the excellent MDXConf lineup](https://mdxjs.com/conf/).

Commit message:

feat: updates frontmatter, description to excerpt

src/content/blog/2020/digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic/digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic.mdx, after:

---
slug: digital-gardening-with-mdx-magic
date: 2020-08-24
title: "Digital Gardening with MDX Magic"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
excerpt: "I’m not sure about any of y’all, but I have more that one personal site that I’ve created over the years, using the technology of the time..."
tags:
  - accessibility
  - css
  - inclusive design
  - digital garden
  - mdx
featuredImage:
  url: "./daylilies-in-july.jpg"
  alt: ""
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: true
---

import {
  Button,
  Card,
  CTALink,
  DisplayBox,
  Icon,
  Link,
} from "../../../../components";

import * as GrommetSystem from "grommet";
import { Favorite, ShareOption } from "grommet-icons";

import { Prism } from "@astrojs/prism";

import { CodePen } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/codepen";
import { Flickr } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/flickr";
import { Instagram } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/instagram";
import { YouTube } from "mdx-embed/dist/components/youtube";

---

I’m not sure about any of y’all, but I have more that one personal site that I’ve created over the years, using the technology of the time. Every once in a while, I’d look back at that site and think “wow, you should really update that code, Kathleen.”

---

## Why Digital Gardening

When I first heard the term digital gardening, it really struck a chord with me because it was the perfect blend of what works for me. I could create a site that’s more of a catch-all for my interests, publish what I want, without thinking of the “state of done”, and keep moving. If I want to make a code reference for future me to remember something I learned at the time? If I want to go back and edit? Cool. If not, no big deal.

## React component support

<DisplayBox>
  <Button>Click me</Button> <Button size="small">Click me</Button>
</DisplayBox>

```jsx react-live
<div>
  <Button>Click me</Button>
  {/*<GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />*/}
</div>
```

<Prism lang="jsx" code={`const foo = 'bar';`} />

## gatsby-plugin-embed is SWEET!

### CodePen embeds!

<CodePen codePenId="eYOQQxY" />

### Flickr embeds!

<Flickr flickrLink="5305/5641024002_61bbfb08f2_3k.jpg" />

### YouTube embeds!

<YouTube youTubeId="yGd8j0sXhQ4" />

### Instagram embeds!

<Instagram instagramId="B3z1w2hg4WY" />

## Hello... custom codeblocks!

Fancy custom codeblocks are so fancy, yo.

### Editable fancy code

```jsx react-live
<div>
  <Button size="large">Click me</Button>
  {/* <GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />
  <GrommetSystem.Box
    direction="row"
    border={{ color: "brand", size: "large" }}
    pad="medium"
  >
    <GrommetSystem.Button primary label="label" />
    <GrommetSystem.CheckBoxGroup options={["Maui", "Kauai", "Oahu"]} />
  </GrommetSystem.Box>
  <GrommetSystem.Card height="small" width="small" background="light-1">
    <GrommetSystem.CardHeader pad="medium">Header</GrommetSystem.CardHeader>
    <GrommetSystem.CardBody pad="medium">Body</GrommetSystem.CardBody>
    <GrommetSystem.CardFooter
      pad={{ horizontal: "small" }}
      background="light-2"
    >
      <GrommetSystem.Button icon={<Favorite color="red" />} hoverIndicator />
      <GrommetSystem.Button
        icon={<ShareOption color="plain" />}
        hoverIndicator
      />
    </GrommetSystem.CardFooter>
  </GrommetSystem.Card> */}
</div>
```

---

If you haven't yet, head on over and check out [the excellent MDXConf lineup](https://mdxjs.com/conf/).
