src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04.mdx, before:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04
date: 2020-04-10
title: "Adding Formik React Components to Your Gatsby Site"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
description: "Documenting all the ways you can use GatsbyJS through a set of challenges."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
  - Formik
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Now that I've had a chance to play with using the [gatsby-image](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/gatsby-image) plugin to my site for imaging handling, it's time for the next challenge. This one includes creating a contact form and [adding third-party React components to my site](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/react-component), using [Formik components](https://jaredpalmer.com/formik). Creating forms is not my favorite thing to do, so I wanted to know if Formik would make things less painful. Here's what I learned.

---

## Using Formik to build a contact form

I started off by reading [Formik's getting started page](https://jaredpalmer.com/formik/docs/overview) and then followed the Formik tutorial through all the steps. I then learned that the site I spun up on [Gatsby Cloud](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/) — which uses [Netlify for CDN hosting](https://docs.netlify.com/) — can **also** use [Netlify Forms](https://docs.netlify.com/forms/setup/) (yay!). I got a bit lost finding/remembering the site settings, and figuring out that my site was connected to my [Netlify team](https://docs.netlify.com/accounts-and-billing/team-management/).

Formik forms don’t use the `method=“post”` in their examples at all, but [Gatsby's Sending Form Data](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/building-a-contact-form/#sending-form-data) documentation showed that attribute in their example for using Netlify’s form handling feature.

According to [MDN's documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form) on forms, this is what is written about the [form method attribute](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#attr-formmethod):

> This value is overridden by `formmethod` attributes on `<button>`, `<input type="submit">`, or `<input type="image">` elements.

This was confusing to me and my questions were:

1. Should we use Formik’s Form component here at all?
1. What happens if you use the Form component here and use a `button` with a `type="submit"` without using the `formmethod` attribute?

Using Formik's `<Form>` component gave me really odd rendering errors, so I decided to use a standard form JSX element instead, ditched the `method` on the form, and made sure my `Button` component's `type` attribute was set to `submit`.

After digging around some other projects to see if anyone else was using `Formik` in their forms, I discovered that you can indeed use your own form component and combine with Formik. For example, [Paul Scanlon](https://paulie.dev/) did so with [gatsby-theme-gatstats](https://gatsby-theme-gatstats.netlify.com/) in his `<NetlifyForm />` component. His [contact form demo](https://github.com/PaulieScanlon/gatsby-theme-gatstats/blob/master/demo/src/pages/contact.mdx) didn’t have a clear example of a `handleSubmit` function, other than passing through the prop from the `<Formik>` component. I wondered if I needed to create a `handleSubmit` function at all. Once I added a URL to the action to load a success page after the form submission, everything seemed to work. Or did it?

So far, this challenge took me the longest because of the ‘fun’ of forms. Anyhow, I still have this odd warning when using the `setTimeout()` in the `<Formik>` component's `onSubmit` `fetch` method:

```bash
index.js:2177 Warning: React instrumentation encountered an error: TypeError: Converting circular structure to JSON
--> starting at object with constructor 'Object'
| property '\_context' -> object with constructor 'Object'
--- property 'Provider' closes the circle
```

I kept on searching for more `Formik` examples and found this one by [Derek Spaulding](https://www.derekaspaulding.com/blog/simple-contact-form-with-gatsby-formik-and-netlify/). This example was useful in showing that you can indeed pass through Netlify props to the Formik `<Form>` component.

Sweet. My form now works on my [kathleenmcmahon.dev](https://kathleenmcmahon.dev) site — the site I’m deploying directly to Netlify though Github. [My 100 Days of Gatsby Challenges site](https://kathleenmcmahon.netlify.app) that’s deployed manually through Gatsby Cloud somehow doesn’t talk to the Netlify form action properly for some reason. I will figure out later and read up more about the ins/outs of using Gatsby Cloud as a CI service and how it relates to Netlify forms and/or functions by reading [Josh Comeau's post on the subject](https://joshwcomeau.com/gatsby/netlify-functions-and-gatsby-cloud/). Now... onward to [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 5](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-05/).

Commit message:

feat: updates frontmatter, description to excerpt

src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04.mdx, after:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-04
date: 2020-04-10
title: "Adding Formik React Components to Your Gatsby Site"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
excerpt: "Now that I've had a chance to play with using the gatsby-image plugin to my site for imaging handling, it's time for the next challenge..."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
  - Formik
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Now that I've had a chance to play with using the [gatsby-image](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/gatsby-image) plugin to my site for imaging handling, it's time for the next challenge. This one includes creating a contact form and [adding third-party React components to my site](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/react-component), using [Formik components](https://jaredpalmer.com/formik). Creating forms is not my favorite thing to do, so I wanted to know if Formik would make things less painful. Here's what I learned.

---

## Using Formik to build a contact form

I started off by reading [Formik's getting started page](https://jaredpalmer.com/formik/docs/overview) and then followed the Formik tutorial through all the steps. I then learned that the site I spun up on [Gatsby Cloud](https://www.gatsbyjs.com/) — which uses [Netlify for CDN hosting](https://docs.netlify.com/) — can **also** use [Netlify Forms](https://docs.netlify.com/forms/setup/) (yay!). I got a bit lost finding/remembering the site settings, and figuring out that my site was connected to my [Netlify team](https://docs.netlify.com/accounts-and-billing/team-management/).

Formik forms don’t use the `method=“post”` in their examples at all, but [Gatsby's Sending Form Data](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/building-a-contact-form/#sending-form-data) documentation showed that attribute in their example for using Netlify’s form handling feature.

According to [MDN's documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/form) on forms, this is what is written about the [form method attribute](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/button#attr-formmethod):

> This value is overridden by `formmethod` attributes on `<button>`, `<input type="submit">`, or `<input type="image">` elements.

This was confusing to me and my questions were:

1. Should we use Formik’s Form component here at all?
1. What happens if you use the Form component here and use a `button` with a `type="submit"` without using the `formmethod` attribute?

Using Formik's `<Form>` component gave me really odd rendering errors, so I decided to use a standard form JSX element instead, ditched the `method` on the form, and made sure my `Button` component's `type` attribute was set to `submit`.

After digging around some other projects to see if anyone else was using `Formik` in their forms, I discovered that you can indeed use your own form component and combine with Formik. For example, [Paul Scanlon](https://paulie.dev/) did so with [gatsby-theme-gatstats](https://gatsby-theme-gatstats.netlify.com/) in his `<NetlifyForm />` component. His [contact form demo](https://github.com/PaulieScanlon/gatsby-theme-gatstats/blob/master/demo/src/pages/contact.mdx) didn’t have a clear example of a `handleSubmit` function, other than passing through the prop from the `<Formik>` component. I wondered if I needed to create a `handleSubmit` function at all. Once I added a URL to the action to load a success page after the form submission, everything seemed to work. Or did it?

So far, this challenge took me the longest because of the ‘fun’ of forms. Anyhow, I still have this odd warning when using the `setTimeout()` in the `<Formik>` component's `onSubmit` `fetch` method:

```bash
index.js:2177 Warning: React instrumentation encountered an error: TypeError: Converting circular structure to JSON
--> starting at object with constructor 'Object'
| property '\_context' -> object with constructor 'Object'
--- property 'Provider' closes the circle
```

I kept on searching for more `Formik` examples and found this one by [Derek Spaulding](https://www.derekaspaulding.com/blog/simple-contact-form-with-gatsby-formik-and-netlify/). This example was useful in showing that you can indeed pass through Netlify props to the Formik `<Form>` component.

Sweet. My form now works on my [kathleenmcmahon.dev](https://kathleenmcmahon.dev) site — the site I’m deploying directly to Netlify though Github. [My 100 Days of Gatsby Challenges site](https://kathleenmcmahon.netlify.app) that’s deployed manually through Gatsby Cloud somehow doesn’t talk to the Netlify form action properly for some reason. I will figure out later and read up more about the ins/outs of using Gatsby Cloud as a CI service and how it relates to Netlify forms and/or functions by reading [Josh Comeau's post on the subject](https://joshwcomeau.com/gatsby/netlify-functions-and-gatsby-cloud/). Now... onward to [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 5](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-05/).
