src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09.mdx, before:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09
date: 2020-04-19
title: "Improve your Gatby site rank in search engines"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
description: "Documenting all the ways you can use GatsbyJS through a set of challenges."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

100 Days of Gatsby challenge 9. This one involved [improving your site's ranking in search engines](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/seo/#challenge-9-help-your-site-rank-no-1-in-search-engines).

---

When following the [Adding an SEO component](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/add-seo-component/) portion of the tutorial, I noticed that the guidance initially indicated to declare a `location` const through the `useLocation()` method, then switched to using `pathname` instead. Why?

Also, I noticed that the [add page metadata](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/#add-page-metadata) section of [Gatsby Tutorial part 8](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight) took a different approach for passing in the metadata into the [react-helmet](https://github.com/nfl/react-helmet) component. Which way is optimal? I assumed the latter option because of the fallback prop structure.

I got a bit stuck creating a sitemap. It wasn't clear while following the instructions how to test the solution. Do you generate a static build and deploy to test? Can you test this while running the site locally? I couldn’t see that sitemap.xml page when running locally using `npm run start`.

Referring back to [Gatsby tutorial part 8 - Preparing a site to go live](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/) page, I tried a `gatsby build` and threw an error in the GraphQL request:

```bash
Cannot query field "siteUrl" on type "SiteSiteMetadata".
GraphQL request:13:7
12 |     siteMetadata {
13 |       siteUrl
   |       ^
14 |     }
```

Once again, I reviewed the instructions. The [gatsby-plugin-advanced-sitemap](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-advanced-sitemap/) used the `siteUrl` key rather than the `url` key — which is used for the SEO tutorial. After I added that `siteUrl` key, in addition to the `url` key, the sitemap would build. I still needed to test this in the deployed site to see if the pages populate in the sitemap.

**Question:** for things like sitemaps and Lighthouse audits, must we always create a production build (gatsby build) and serve it locally (gatsby serve) to test for SEO and performance things? Ahh, this is answered in [Challenge 10](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/performance) in the [audit with Lighthouse](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/audit-with-lighthouse/):

> The Gatsby development server is optimized for making development fast, but the site that it generates, while closely resembling a production version of the site, isn’t as optimized.

Good to know. Moving on to [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 10](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-10/).

Commit message:

feat: updates frontmatter, description to excerpt

src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09.mdx, after:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09
date: 2020-04-19
title: "Improve your Gatby site rank in search engines"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
excerpt: "100 Days of Gatsby challenge 9. This one involved improving your site's ranking in search engines . When following the Adding an SEO..."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

100 Days of Gatsby challenge 9. This one involved [improving your site's ranking in search engines](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/seo/#challenge-9-help-your-site-rank-no-1-in-search-engines).

---

When following the [Adding an SEO component](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/add-seo-component/) portion of the tutorial, I noticed that the guidance initially indicated to declare a `location` const through the `useLocation()` method, then switched to using `pathname` instead. Why?

Also, I noticed that the [add page metadata](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/#add-page-metadata) section of [Gatsby Tutorial part 8](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight) took a different approach for passing in the metadata into the [react-helmet](https://github.com/nfl/react-helmet) component. Which way is optimal? I assumed the latter option because of the fallback prop structure.

I got a bit stuck creating a sitemap. It wasn't clear while following the instructions how to test the solution. Do you generate a static build and deploy to test? Can you test this while running the site locally? I couldn’t see that sitemap.xml page when running locally using `npm run start`.

Referring back to [Gatsby tutorial part 8 - Preparing a site to go live](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/) page, I tried a `gatsby build` and threw an error in the GraphQL request:

```bash
Cannot query field "siteUrl" on type "SiteSiteMetadata".
GraphQL request:13:7
12 |     siteMetadata {
13 |       siteUrl
   |       ^
14 |     }
```

Once again, I reviewed the instructions. The [gatsby-plugin-advanced-sitemap](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-advanced-sitemap/) used the `siteUrl` key rather than the `url` key — which is used for the SEO tutorial. After I added that `siteUrl` key, in addition to the `url` key, the sitemap would build. I still needed to test this in the deployed site to see if the pages populate in the sitemap.

**Question:** for things like sitemaps and Lighthouse audits, must we always create a production build (gatsby build) and serve it locally (gatsby serve) to test for SEO and performance things? Ahh, this is answered in [Challenge 10](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/performance) in the [audit with Lighthouse](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/audit-with-lighthouse/):

> The Gatsby development server is optimized for making development fast, but the site that it generates, while closely resembling a production version of the site, isn’t as optimized.

Good to know. Moving on to [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 10](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-10/).
