src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07.mdx, before:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07
date: 2020-04-17
title: "Making your Gatsby site a Progressive Web App"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
description: "Documenting all the ways you can use GatsbyJS through a set of challenges."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Another short writeup for the[100 Days of Gatsby Challenges](https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs/status/1208068118335119364). This one involved [making your Gatsby site into a Progressive Web App](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/pwa/) so your site will work well with poor internet service and if you're offline. This challenge involved using [gatsby-plugin-manifest](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-manifest) and [gatsby-plugin-offline](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-offline).

---

Much of this was covered in [Tutorial Part 8](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/) of the [first challenge](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-01), so this challenge is completed.

Next up, [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 8](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08/).

Commit message:

feat: updates frontmatter, description to excerpt

src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07.mdx, after:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-07
date: 2020-04-17
title: "Making your Gatsby site a Progressive Web App"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
excerpt: "Another short writeup for the 100 Days of Gatsby Challenges . This one involved making your Gatsby site into a Progressive Web App so your"
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Another short writeup for the[100 Days of Gatsby Challenges](https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs/status/1208068118335119364). This one involved [making your Gatsby site into a Progressive Web App](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/blog/100days/pwa/) so your site will work well with poor internet service and if you're offline. This challenge involved using [gatsby-plugin-manifest](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-manifest) and [gatsby-plugin-offline](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-offline).

---

Much of this was covered in [Tutorial Part 8](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/tutorial/part-eight/) of the [first challenge](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-01), so this challenge is completed.

Next up, [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 8](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08/).
