src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08.mdx, before:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08
date: 2020-04-18
title: "Accessible Forms and Images in Gatsby"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
description: "Documenting all the ways you can use GatsbyJS through a set of challenges."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Making apps accessible to all users is something I aim for whenever I do any design or engineering, so this particular [100 Days of Gatsby](https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs/status/1208068118335119364) challenge is near and dear to my heart. I completed these steps during [Challenge 1](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-01), however, because the site is more expanded, I did a re-audit to make sure nothing broke in the process.

---

## Re-auditing my site:

Once I started re-auditng the site for accessibility, I noticed that the form `<labels>` were not being recognized as properly with their respective `<inputs>` anymore, so I made sure that the `id` attribute was clearly added to each input. The component was relying on using spreaded props before this. The `<iframe>` embeds were missing the `title` attribute which provides descriptive information for screen readers, so I added those in.

I also noticed that any of the [MDX files that used a default export](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/mdx/writing-pages/#defining-a-layout) in the document would fail the accessibility audit, because they would not use the default layout defined in my `gatsby-config` file. The default layout file I used contained my`<SEO>` component, which injects a `lang` attribute into the `<html>` element to help search engines return language specific results, and a page `<title>` element in the `<head>` to describe the purpose of the page. Importing the `<SEO>` component into those particular files solved the issue.

Once all those accessibility issues were solved, I chose to focus on getting end-to-end testing scaffolded using [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), along with some unit testing on one component as a proof of concept.

I decided to tackle setting up [Cypress CI GitHub action](https://github.com/cypress-io/github-action) in my [kathleenmcmahon.dev](https://kathleenmcmahon.dev) site… later.

---

## Setting up unit and end-to-end testing:

While I was setting up my unit testing config, I had to remember to refer to the `config` file's code snippet repeatedly when referencing the [creating a configuration file for Jest section](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/unit-testing/#2-creating-a-configuration-file-for-jest) documentation.

As I went back and started adding support for unit testing with Jest, I learned that I should delete the `cypress/integration` folder. Otherwise, the test script that called Jest would also look at that integration folder and try to test it. I deleted it, but still, Jest was running tests that lived in the `cypress/e2e` folder. Odd. I then tried going about it using the steps described in the [Gatsby documentation on testing React components](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/testing-react-components/), then tried using [@testing-library/react](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro) and [@testing-library/jest-dom](https://testing-library.com/docs/ecosystem-jest-dom) instead. Still no luck.

Then... I noticed this sentence in the documentation:

> Lastly you need to tell Jest where to find this file. Open your `jest.config.js` and add this entry to the bottom after `setupFiles`.

I wondered if order was important in the config, since the link to the [using-jest](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/using-jest) Gatsby example at the **bottom** of the page showed a **different order in the config**.

`setupFiles` in that example was listed **after** the `setupFilesAfterEnv` in the example repo config, rather than before. I changed the order in my config file and still ran into issues. After some digging, I discovered that **file naming is important**.

When adding both Jest and Cypress support into the app, if you named your Cypress test file according to the [writing tests for Cypress](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/end-to-end-testing/#writing-tests) section and named your file `accessibility.test.js` rather than `accessibility.js`, Jest would try to run a test on that file. Once I removed the `.test` from the file name, all tests ran smoothly.

Another way I could have avoided this issue was to add `cypress` as one of the items to the [exclude/ignore files from Jest coverage](https://codewithhugo.com/jest-exclude-coverage/) statement in the `jest.config.js` `testPathIgnorePatterns` array https://codewithhugo.com/jest-exclude-coverage/

---

## Items to tackle later

I’d love to try out testing components that use GraphQL in [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/), because I really enjoy all the features Storybook provided when I used it for the O'Reilly Design System component testing. Also, I’m planning to look into using [Cloudinary](https://cloudinary.com/) to host my images.

That wraps up this challenge. Next on my list, [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 9](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09/).

Commit message:

feat: updates frontmatter, description to excerpt

src/content/blog/2020/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08.mdx, after:

---
slug: 100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-08
date: 2020-04-18
title: "Accessible Forms and Images in Gatsby"
author: "Kathleen McMahon"
excerpt: "Making apps accessible to all users is something I aim for whenever I do any design or engineering, so this particular 100 Days of Gatsby..."
tags:
  - 100 Days of Gatsby
  - GatsbyJS
isPublished: true
isHidden: false
isFeatured: false
---

Making apps accessible to all users is something I aim for whenever I do any design or engineering, so this particular [100 Days of Gatsby](https://twitter.com/gatsbyjs/status/1208068118335119364) challenge is near and dear to my heart. I completed these steps during [Challenge 1](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-01), however, because the site is more expanded, I did a re-audit to make sure nothing broke in the process.

---

## Re-auditing my site:

Once I started re-auditng the site for accessibility, I noticed that the form `<labels>` were not being recognized as properly with their respective `<inputs>` anymore, so I made sure that the `id` attribute was clearly added to each input. The component was relying on using spreaded props before this. The `<iframe>` embeds were missing the `title` attribute which provides descriptive information for screen readers, so I added those in.

I also noticed that any of the [MDX files that used a default export](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/mdx/writing-pages/#defining-a-layout) in the document would fail the accessibility audit, because they would not use the default layout defined in my `gatsby-config` file. The default layout file I used contained my`<SEO>` component, which injects a `lang` attribute into the `<html>` element to help search engines return language specific results, and a page `<title>` element in the `<head>` to describe the purpose of the page. Importing the `<SEO>` component into those particular files solved the issue.

Once all those accessibility issues were solved, I chose to focus on getting end-to-end testing scaffolded using [Cypress](https://www.cypress.io/), along with some unit testing on one component as a proof of concept.

I decided to tackle setting up [Cypress CI GitHub action](https://github.com/cypress-io/github-action) in my [kathleenmcmahon.dev](https://kathleenmcmahon.dev) site… later.

---

## Setting up unit and end-to-end testing:

While I was setting up my unit testing config, I had to remember to refer to the `config` file's code snippet repeatedly when referencing the [creating a configuration file for Jest section](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/unit-testing/#2-creating-a-configuration-file-for-jest) documentation.

As I went back and started adding support for unit testing with Jest, I learned that I should delete the `cypress/integration` folder. Otherwise, the test script that called Jest would also look at that integration folder and try to test it. I deleted it, but still, Jest was running tests that lived in the `cypress/e2e` folder. Odd. I then tried going about it using the steps described in the [Gatsby documentation on testing React components](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/testing-react-components/), then tried using [@testing-library/react](https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/intro) and [@testing-library/jest-dom](https://testing-library.com/docs/ecosystem-jest-dom) instead. Still no luck.

Then... I noticed this sentence in the documentation:

> Lastly you need to tell Jest where to find this file. Open your `jest.config.js` and add this entry to the bottom after `setupFiles`.

I wondered if order was important in the config, since the link to the [using-jest](https://github.com/gatsbyjs/gatsby/tree/master/examples/using-jest) Gatsby example at the **bottom** of the page showed a **different order in the config**.

`setupFiles` in that example was listed **after** the `setupFilesAfterEnv` in the example repo config, rather than before. I changed the order in my config file and still ran into issues. After some digging, I discovered that **file naming is important**.

When adding both Jest and Cypress support into the app, if you named your Cypress test file according to the [writing tests for Cypress](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/end-to-end-testing/#writing-tests) section and named your file `accessibility.test.js` rather than `accessibility.js`, Jest would try to run a test on that file. Once I removed the `.test` from the file name, all tests ran smoothly.

Another way I could have avoided this issue was to add `cypress` as one of the items to the [exclude/ignore files from Jest coverage](https://codewithhugo.com/jest-exclude-coverage/) statement in the `jest.config.js` `testPathIgnorePatterns` array https://codewithhugo.com/jest-exclude-coverage/

---

## Items to tackle later

I’d love to try out testing components that use GraphQL in [Storybook](https://storybook.js.org/), because I really enjoy all the features Storybook provided when I used it for the O'Reilly Design System component testing. Also, I’m planning to look into using [Cloudinary](https://cloudinary.com/) to host my images.

That wraps up this challenge. Next on my list, [100 Days of Gatsby — Challenge 9](/write/100-days-of-gatsby-challenge-09/).
